A backyard, a space tangential or completely surrounding the home. That’s where the traspatio is. Doña Magdalena, Doña Rosenda, Doña Mary Carmen and Doña Lupe tend to theirs. Rue, basil, spearmint, mountain mint, bougainvillea, cilantro, wild cilantro, epazote, white sagebrush, guava leaves, black nightshade, Mexican pepperleaf, moringa, fennel, avocado leaves, neem, rosemary, rose, aloe vera, bryophyllum pinnatum, purple verbenaceae. They cook on thin metal sheets over oak wood. Chickens and maybe turkeys walk around, sometimes cats nap near the adobe stove. Doña Nora shows me the black corn she’ll soak tonight. White chili, serrano chili, tepin chili, pomegranate, coconut, jackfruit, red corn, white corn, orchids, dahlias, green avocado. The night before leaving El Triunfo II, Doña Rosenda trims two months worth of leaves from her malabar bush, solanum erianthum, so I may plant it. I’m to make one litre of tea a day, drink it as I do water. Back in my family’s home, a neighbor recognizes the plant and we pack him a bag full of leaves.


This research amplifies and puts into dialogue the structures of governance, communal land holding, land cultivation and narratives via the lens of the minor. Located in Chiapas, Mexico, I explore how the historical conditions of coloniality, political refusal and soil microbes are interwoven forces in continuous conversation with the gentle gestures of tending land in agrarian contexts. In this marginal zone, political agency rubs against economic models of progress through the slow but consistent embodied knowledges applied in cultivation. Script writing and film become active methods to weave these various scales—to emphasize that quotidian life cannot be easily reduced, divided or representationally conquered.